
<html>
	<head>
		<title> </title>
	</head>
	<body>
		<nav>
    		<ul>
        		<li><a href="/">Home</a></li>
	        	<li><a href="/Summaries">About</a></li>
        		<li><a href="/Abstracts">CV</a></li>
    		</ul>
		</nav>
		<div class="container">
    		<div class="blurb">
        		<h1> Abstracts </h1>
			<h3> Week 3 </h3>
<p><b>American Aedes vexans Mosquitoes are Competent Vectors of Zika Virus</b> <i>Alex Gendernalik1, James Weger-Lucarelli1, Selene M. Garcia Luna1, Joseph R. Fauver1, Claudia Rückert1, Reyes A. Murrieta1, Nicholas Bergren1, Demitrios Samaras1, Chilinh Nguyen1, Rebekah C. Kading1, Gregory D. Ebel1</i>
Starting in 2013–2014, the Americas have experienced a massive outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) which has now reached at least 49 countries. Although most cases have occurred in South America and the Caribbean, imported and autochthonous cases have occurred in the United States. Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes are known vectors of ZIKV. Little is known about the potential for temperate Aedes mosquitoes to transmit ZIKV. Aedes vexans has a worldwide distribution, is highly abundant in particular localities, aggressively bites humans, and is a competent vector of several arboviruses. However, it is not clear whether Ae. vexans mosquitoes are competent to transmit ZIKV. To determine the vector competence of Ae. vexans for ZIKV, wild-caught mosquitoes were exposed to an infectious bloodmeal containing a ZIKV strain isolated during the current outbreak. Approximately 80% of 148 mosquitoes tested became infected by ZIKV, and approximately 5% transmitted infectious virus after 14 days of extrinsic incubation. These results establish that Ae. vexans are competent ZIKV vectors. Their relative importance as vectors (i.e., their vectorial capacity) depends on feeding behavior, longevity, and other factors that are likely to vary in ecologically distinct environments.</P>
				
<p><b>Serosurvey of Crimean–Congo Hemorrhagic Fever Virus in Cattle, Mali, West Africa</b> <i>Authors: Ousmane Maiga1, Miriam Andrada Sas2, Kyle Rosenke3, Badian Kamissoko5, Marc Mertens2, Nafomon Sogoba1, Abdallah Traore5, Modibo Sangare6, Mamadou Niang5, Tom G. Schwan4, Hamidou Moussa Maiga6, Sekou F. Traore1, Heinz Feldmann3,8, David Safronetz7,8, Martin H</i> Groschup2 Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever is a tick-borne disease caused by the arbovirus Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV, family Bunyaviridae, genus Nairovirus). CCHFV can cause a severe hemorrhagic fever with high-case fatality rates in humans. CCHFV has a wide geographic range and has been described in around 30 countries in the Middle East, Asia, Europe, and Africa including Mali and neighboring countries. To date, little is known about the prevalence rates of CCHFV in Mali. Here, using banked bovine serum samples from across the country, we describe the results of a seroepidemiological study for CCHFV aimed at identifying regions of circulation in Mali. In total, 1,074 serum samples were tested by a modified in-house CCHFV-IgG-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with confirmatory testing by commercial ELISA and immunofluorescence assay. Overall, 66% of samples tested were positive for CCHFV-specific IgG antibodies. Regional seroprevalence rates ranged from 15% to 95% and seemed to correlate with cattle density. Our results demonstrate that CCHFV prevalence is high in many regions in Mali and suggest that CCHFV surveillance should be established.</p>

<p><b>Susceptibility of Florida Mosquitoes to Infection with Chikungunya Virus</b> <i>Michael H. Reiskind1, Kendra Pesko1, Catherine J. Westbrook1, Christopher N. Mores1</I> Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) has caused recent, large epidemics on islands in the Indian Ocean, raising the possibility of more widespread CHIKV epidemics. Historically, CHIKV has been vectored by Aedes aegypti, but these outbreaks likely also involved Ae. albopictus. To examine the potential for an outbreak of CHIKV in Florida, we determined the susceptibility to CHIKV of F1 Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus from Florida. In addition, we also evaluated two well-characterized laboratory strains (Rockefeller and Lake Charles) of these species. We determined infection and dissemination rates as well as total body titer of mosquitoes 7 days post-exposure (pe) (Ae. albopictus) and 3, 7, and 10 days pe (Ae. aegypti). All mosquito strains were susceptible to both infection and dissemination, with some variation between strains. Our results suggest Florida would be vulnerable to transmission of CHIKV in urban and rural areas where the two vector species occur.</p>
<h3> Week 4 </h3>
<p><b>Sand fly population dynamics and cutaneous leishmaniasis among soldiers in an Atlantic forest remnant in northeastern Brazil</b><i> Filipe Dantas-Torres, Kamila Gaudêncio da Silva Sales, Débora Elienai de Oliveira Miranda, Fernando José da Silva, Luciana Aguiar Figueredo, Fábio Lopes de Melo, Maria Edileuza Felinto de Brito, Maria Sandra Andrade, Sinval Pinto Brandão-Filho.</i> Outbreaks of cutaneous leishmaniasis are relatively common among soldiers involved in nocturnal activities in tropical forests. We investigated the population dynamics of sand flies in a military training camp located in a remnant of Atlantic rainforest in northeastern Brazil, where outbreaks of cutaneous leishmaniasis have sporadically been described. From July 2012 to July 2014, light traps were monthly placed in 10 collection sites, being nine sites located near the forest edge and one near a sheep and goat stable. Light traps operated from 5:00 pm to 6:00 am, during four consecutive nights. Leishmania infection in sand flies was assessed using a fast real-time PCR assay. Cases of cutaneous leishmaniasis among soldiers were also investigated. In total, 24,606 sand flies belonging to 25 species were identified. Males (n = 12,683) predominated over females (n = 11,923). Sand flies were present during all months, being more numerous in March (n = 1,691) and April 2013 (n = 3,324). Lutzomyia choti (72.9%) was the most abundant species, followed by Lutzomyia longispina (13.8%), Lutzomyia complexa (5.3%), representing together >90% of the sand flies collected. Forty cases of cutaneous leishmaniasis were recorded among soldiers from January 2012 to December 2014. Leishmania isolates were obtained from eight patients and were all characterized as Leishmania braziliensis. Soldiers and anyone overnighting in Atlantic rainforest remnants should adopt preventative measures such as the use of repellents on bare skin or clothes and insecticide-treated tents.</P>

<p><b>Risk analysis and prediction of visceral leishmaniasis dispersion in São Paulo State, Brazil.</b><i> Anaiá da Paixão Sevá, Liang Mao, Fredy Galvis-Ovallos, Joanna Marie Tucker Lima, Denis Valle.</i> Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is an important neglected disease caused by a protozoan parasite, and represents a serious public health problem in many parts of the world. It is zoonotic in Europe and Latin America, where infected dogs constitute the main domestic reservoir for the parasite and play a key role in VL transmission to humans. In Brazil this disease is caused by the protozoan Leishmania infantum chagasi, and is transmitted by the sand fly Lutzomyia longipalpis. Despite programs aimed at eliminating infection sources, the disease continues to spread throughout the Country. VL in São Paulo State, Brazil, first appeared in the northwestern region, spreading in a southeasterly direction over time. We integrate data on the VL vector, infected dogs and infected human dispersion from 1999 to 2013 through an innovative spatial temporal Bayesian model in conjunction with geographic information system. This model is used to infer the drivers of the invasion process and predict the future progression of VL through the State. We found that vector dispersion was influenced by vector presence in nearby municipalities at the previous time step, proximity to the Bolívia-Brazil gas pipeline, and high temperatures (i.e., annual average between 20 and 23°C). Key factors affecting infected dog dispersion included proximity to the Marechal Rondon Highway, high temperatures, and presence of the competent vector within the same municipality. Finally, vector presence, presence of infected dogs, and rainfall (approx. 270 to 540mm/year) drove the dispersion of human VL cases. Surprisingly, economic factors exhibited no noticeable influence on disease dispersion. Based on these drivers and stochastic simulations, we identified which municipalities are most likely to be invaded by vectors and infected hosts in the future. Prioritizing prevention and control strategies within the identified municipalities may help halt the spread of VL while reducing monitoring costs. Our results contribute important knowledge to public and animal health policy planning, and suggest that prevention and control strategies should focus on vector control and on blocking contact between vectors and hosts in the priority areas identified to be at risk.</p>

<p><b>Genetic evidence for a worldwide chaotic dispersion pattern of the arbovirus vector, Aedes albopictus.</b><i> Mosè Manni, Carmela R. Guglielmino, Francesca Scolari, Anubis Vega-Rúa, Anna-Bella Failloux, Pradya Somboon, Antonella Lisa, Grazia Savini, Mariangela Bonizzoni, Ludvik M. Gomulski, Anna R. Malacrida, Giuliano Gasperi.</i> Aedes albopictus, the Asian tiger mosquito is the most invasive species in the world. Over the past 30 years, from its native tropical Southeast Asia it rapidly spread across the world, and it is currently present in several tropical, subtropical and temperate countries due to its high ecological plasticity. Its dramatic global expansion has resulted in public health concerns as a consequence of its vector competence for several arboviruses, such as chikungunya, dengue and Zika, which are the most prevalent pathogens of humans. The identification of the migration routes and, consequently, the demographic origin of mosquito adventive populations is a priority to prevent local outbreaks of viral infection. Using a combined population genetics and Bayesian approach, we found that the worldwide invasion of this mosquito has not occurred through a step-by-step expansion process from the native Southeast Asia. A recent and chaotic human-mediated propagule distribution allowed adventive populations to be established in the Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Basin, and North America regions. We have detected high intra-population variability, which may co-operate with the genetic mechanisms controlling vector competence.</p>
<h3> Week 5 </h3>
<p><b>Landscape, Climate and Hantavirus Cardiopulmonary Syndrome Outbreaks.</b><i> Prist, P.R., D´Andrea, P.S. & Metzger, J.P. EcoHealth (2017).</i>  We performed a literature review in order to improve our understanding of how landscape and climate drivers affect HCPS outbreaks. Anthropogenic landscape changes such as forest loss, fragmentation and agricultural land uses are related with a boost in hantavirus reservoir species abundance and hantavirus prevalence in tropical areas, increasing HCPS risk. Additionally, higher precipitation, especially in arid regions, favors an increase in vegetational biomass, which augments the resources for reservoir rodents, also increasing HCPS risk. Although these relationships were observed, few studies described it so far, and the ones that did it are concentrated in few places. To guide future research on this issue, we build a conceptual model relating landscape and climate variables with HCPS outbreaks and identified research opportunities. We point out the need for studies addressing the effects of landscape configuration, temperature and the interaction between climate and landscape variables. Critical landscape thresholds are also highly relevant, once HCPS risk transmission can increase rapidly above a certain degree of landscape degradation. These studies could be relevant to implement preventive measures, creating landscapes that can mitigate disease spread risk.</p>

<p><b>Could Malaria Control Programmes be Timed to Coincide with Onset of Rainfall?</b><i> Komen, K. EcoHealth (2017) 14:2.</i> Malaria cases in South Africa’s Northern Province of Limpopo have surpassed known endemic KwaZulu Natal and Mpumalanga Provinces. This paper applies statistical methods: regression analysis and impulse response function to understand the timing of impact and the length that such impacts last. Climate data (rainfall and temperature) are obtained from South African Weather Services (SAWs); global data from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), while clinical malaria data came from Malaria Control Centre in Tzaneen (Limpopo Province). Data collected span from January 1998 to July 2007. Signs of the coefficients are positive for rainfall and temperature and negative for their exponents. Three out of five independent variables consistently maintain a very high statistical level of significance. The coefficients for climate variables describe an inverted u-shape: parameters for the exponents of rainfall (−0.02, −0.01, −0.02, −0.00) and temperature (−46.61, −47.46, −48.14, −36.04) are both negative. A one standard deviation rise in rainfall (rainfall onset) increases malaria cases, and the effects become sustained for at least 3 months and conclude that onset of rainfall therefore triggers a ‘malaria season’. Malaria control programme and early warning system should be intensified in the first 3 months following the onset of rainfall.</p>

<p><b>High Prevalences and a Wide Genetic Diversity of Simian Retroviruses in Non-human Primate Bushmeat in Rural Areas of the Democratic Republic of Congo.</b><i> Steve, AM., Ahidjo, A., Placide, MK. et al. EcoHealth (2017) 14:1.</i>Like the majority of emerging infectious diseases, HIV and HTLV are of zoonotic origin. Here we assess the risk of cross-species transmissions of their simian counterparts, SIV and STLV, from non-human primates (NHP) to humans in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). A total of 331 samples, derived from NHP bushmeat, were collected as dried blood spots (DBS, n = 283) or as tissue samples (n = 36) at remote forest sites mainly in northern and eastern DRC. SIV antibody prevalences in DBS were estimated with a novel high throughput immunoassay with antigens representing the actual known diversity of HIV/SIV lineages. Antibody-positive samples were confirmed by PCR and sequence analysis. Screening for STLV infection was done with universal primers in tax, and new strains were further characterized in LTR. SIV and STLV infection in tissue samples was done by PCR only. Overall, 5 and 15.4% of NHP bushmeat was infected with SIV and STLV, respectively. A new SIV lineage was identified in Allen’s swamp monkeys (Allenopithecus nigroviridis). Three new STLV-1 subtypes were identified in Allen’s swamp monkeys (Allenopithecus nigroviridis), blue monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis), red-tailed guenons (Cercopithecus ascanius schmidti) and agile mangabeys (Cercocebus agilis). SIV and STLV prevalences varied according to species and geographic region. Our study illustrates clearly, even on a small sample size from a limited number of geographic areas, that our knowledge on the genetic diversity and geographic distribution of simian retroviruses is still limited and that humans continue to be exposed to relative high proportions on infected NHP bushmeat.</p>
<h3> Week 6 </h3>
<p><b>The complex relationship between weather and dengue virus transmission in Thailand</b><i>  Campbell KM, Lin CD, Iamsirithaworn S, Scott TW.  Am J Trop Med Hyg 2013 89(6): 1066–1080.</i> Using a novel analytical approach, weather dynamics and seasonal dengue virus transmission cycles were profiled for each Thailand province, 1983–2001, using monthly assessments of cases, temperature, humidity, and rainfall. We observed systematic differences in the structure of seasonal transmission cycles of different magnitude, the role of weather in regulating seasonal cycles, necessary versus optimal transmission “weather-space,” basis of large epidemics, and predictive indicators that estimate risk. Larger epidemics begin earlier, develop faster, and are predicted at Onset change-point when case counts are low. Temperature defines a viable range for transmission; humidity amplifies the potential within that range. This duality is central to transmission. Eighty percent of 1.2 million severe dengue cases occurred when mean temperature was 27–29.5°C and mean humidity was > 75%. Interventions are most effective when applied early. Most cases occur near Peak, yet small reductions at Onset can substantially reduce epidemic magnitude. Monitoring the Quiet-Phase is fundamental in effectively targeting interventions pre-emptively.</p>

<p><b> CHANGES IN SEROPREVALENCE OF WEST NILE VIRUS ACROSS ILLINOIS IN FREE-RANGING BIRDS FROM 2001 THROUGH 2004 </b><i>Beveroth TA, Ward MP, Lampman RL, Ringia AM, Novak RJ. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2006;74(1): 174-179.</i> Of the 5,236 birds sampled for antibodies to West Nile virus (WNV) in Illinois from 2001 through 2004, 348 (6.6%) birds were seropositive. Our multiple year surveillance identified several avian species that had particularly high percentages of seropositive individuals. The importance of these species in the enzootic and/or epizootic transmission of WNV is discussed relative to their regional abundance and literature on host competency. The species with the highest exposure rates to WNV differed both temporally and regionally. In general, birds that bred or were born in Illinois were more likely to have antibodies than transient birds. There was also a significant difference in the seroprevalence between adults (12.1%) and juveniles (5.5%), indicating that the acquired antibody response from previous years is a critical concern when interpreting seroprevalence rates in wild-caught birds. The most common hosts for St. Louis encephalitis virus were also the most common hosts for WNV, which strongly supports the role of similar vectors for both flaviviruses. Avian species with high WNV seroprevalence rates tended to be those that bred throughout the year, have open cup nests, and live in close proximity to humans.</p>

<p><b> Regional Differences in the Association Between Land Cover and West Nile Virus Disease Incidence in Humans in the United States </b><i>Bowden SE, Magori K, Drake JM. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2011;84(2):234–238.</i> West Nile virus (WNV) is generally considered to be an urban pathogen in the United States, but studies associating land cover and disease incidence, seroprevalence, or infection rate in humans, birds, domesticated and wild mammals, and mosquitoes report varying and sometimes contradictory results at an array of spatial extents. Human infection can provide insight about basic transmission activity; therefore, we analyzed data on the incidence of WNV disease in humans to obtain a comprehensive picture of how human disease and land cover type are associated across the United States. Human WNV disease incidence in Northeastern regions was positively associated with urban land covers, whereas incidence in the Western United States was positively associated with agricultural land covers. We suggest that these regional associations are explained by the geographic distributions of prominent WNV vectors: Culex pipiens complex (including Cx. pipiens and Cx. quinquefasciatus) in the Northeast and Cx. tarsalis in the Western United States.</P>

<h3> Week 7 </h3>

<p><b>Review of Climate, Landscape, and Viral Genetics as Drivers of the Japanese Encephalitis Virus Ecology.</b><i> Le Flohic G, Porphyre V, Barbazan P, Gonzalez J-P (2013) PLoS Negl Trop Dis 7(9):e2208</i> The Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), an arthropod-born Flavivirus, is the major cause of viral encephalitis, responsible for 10,000–15,000 deaths each year, yet is a neglected tropical disease. Since the JEV distribution area has been large and continuously extending toward new Asian and Australasian regions, it is considered an emerging and reemerging pathogen. Despite large effective immunization campaigns, Japanese encephalitis remains a disease of global health concern. JEV zoonotic transmission cycles may be either wild or domestic: the first involves wading birds as wild amplifying hosts; the second involves pigs as the main domestic amplifying hosts. Culex mosquito species, especially Cx. tritaeniorhynchus, are the main competent vectors. Although five JEV genotypes circulate, neither clear-cut genotype-phenotype relationship nor clear variations in genotype fitness to hosts or vectors have been identified. Instead, the molecular epidemiology appears highly dependent on vectors, hosts' biology, and on a set of environmental factors. At global scale, climate, land cover, and land use, otherwise strongly dependent on human activities, affect the abundance of JEV vectors, and of wild and domestic hosts. Chiefly, the increase of rice-cultivated surface, intensively used by wading birds, and of pig production in Asia has provided a high availability of resources to mosquito vectors, enhancing the JEV maintenance, amplification, and transmission. At fine scale, the characteristics (density, size, spatial arrangement) of three landscape elements (paddy fields, pig farms, human habitations) facilitate or impede movement of vectors, then determine how the JEV interacts with hosts and vectors and ultimately the infection risk to humans. If the JEV is introduced in a favorable landscape, either by live infected animals or by vectors, then the virus can emerge and become a major threat for human health. Multidisciplinary research is essential to shed light on the biological mechanisms involved in the emergence, spread, reemergence, and genotypic changes of JEV.</p>

<p><b>Geographic patterns and environmental factors associated with human yellow fever presence in the Americas.</b><i> Hamrick PN, Aldighieri S, Machado G, Leonel DG, Vilca LM, Uriona S, et al. (2017) PLoS Negl Trop Dis 11(9):e0005897.</i>Yellow fever (YF) is a zoonotic disease caused by yellow fever virus (YFV), which is transmitted to humans through the bite of an infected mosquito. Sylvatic and urban cycles have been present in different periods, but currently most cases result from human exposure to jungle or forested environments. The World Health Organization considers 13 countries endemic for YFV in the Americas. The objective of this study was to identify spatial patterns and the relationship between key geographic and environmental factors with the distribution of YF human cases in the Americas. Cases of YF from 2000 to 2014 aggregated by county and eight geo-environmental factors were studied via spatial and statistical analysis. A total of 1,164 cases were reported in this time period, with the majority of them located in Peru, Brazil and Colombia. Yellow fever presence was associated with rain, altitude, diversity of non-human primate hosts and temperature. A large clustered geographic pattern of YF cases was identified along the Andes eastern foothills. Although YF cases can be seen as rare events, the results of this study demonstrate that YF human cases in the Americas are geographically concentrated and are not happening at random, even within areas known to be at risk. Determining the geo-environmental factors related to YFV is essential to delineate risk areas and to consequently improve resource allocation and prevent human cases.</p>

<p><b>Wetlands, wild Bovidae species richness and sheep density delineate risk of Rift Valley fever outbreaks in the African continent and Arabian Peninsula.</b><i> Walsh MG, Willem de Smalen A, Mor SM (2017) PLoS Negl Trop Dis 11(7):e0005756</i> Rift Valley fever (RVF) is an emerging, vector-borne viral zoonosis that has significantly impacted public health, livestock health and production, and food security over the last three decades across large regions of the African continent and the Arabian Peninsula. The potential for expansion of RVF outbreaks within and beyond the range of previous occurrence is unknown. Despite many large national and international epidemics, the landscape epidemiology of RVF remains obscure, particularly with respect to the ecological roles of wildlife reservoirs and surface water features. The current investigation modeled RVF risk throughout Africa and the Arabian Peninsula as a function of a suite of biotic and abiotic landscape features using machine learning methods. Intermittent wetland, wild Bovidae species richness and sheep density were associated with increased landscape suitability to RVF outbreaks. These results suggest the role of wildlife hosts and distinct hydrogeographic landscapes in RVF virus circulation and subsequent outbreaks may be underestimated. These results await validation by studies employing a deeper, field-based interrogation of potential wildlife hosts within high risk taxa.</p>

<h3> Week 8 </h3>

<p><b>Bats Without Borders: Long-Distance Movements and Implications for Disease Risk Management.</b><i> Breed, A.C., Field, H.E., Smith, C.S. et al. EcoHealth (2010) 7:2.</i> Fruit bats of the genus Pteropus (commonly known as flying-foxes) are the natural hosts of several recently emerged zoonotic viruses of animal and human health significance in Australia and Asia, including Hendra and Nipah viruses. Satellite telemetry was used on nine flying-foxes of three species (Pteropus alecto n = 5, P. vampyrusn = 2, and P. neohibernicusn = 2) to determine the scale and pattern of their long-distance movements and their potential to transfer these viruses between countries in the region. The animals were captured and released from six different locations in Australia, Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, and Timor-Leste. Their movements were recorded for a median of 120 (range, 47–342) days with a median total distance travelled of 393 (range, 76–3011) km per individual. Pteropus alecto individuals were observed to move between Australia and Papua New Guinea (Western Province) on four occasions, between Papua New Guinea (Western Province) and Indonesia (Papua) on ten occasions, and to traverse Torres Strait on two occasions. Pteropus vampyrus was observed to move between Timor-Leste and Indonesia (West Timor) on one occasion. These findings expand upon the current literature on the potential for transfer of zoonotic viruses by flying-foxes between countries and have implications for disease risk management and for the conservation management of flying-fox populations in Australia, New Guinea, and the Lesser Sunda Islands.</p>
<p><b>Effect of Forest Fragmentation on Tick Infestations of Birds and Tick Infection Rates by Rickettsia in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil.</b><i> Ogrzewalska, M., Uezu, A., Jenkins, C.N. et al. EcoHealth (2011) 8:3. </i>Habitat loss and modifications affect biodiversity, potentially contributing to outbreaks of infectious diseases. We evaluated if the patch sizeinfragmented areas of Atlantic Forest in southeastern Brazil influences the diversity of forest birds and consequently the prevalence of ticks on birds and the rickettsial infection of these ticks. During 2 years, we collected ticks from birds in 12 sites: four small forest patches (80–140 ha), four large ones (480–1,850 ha), and four forest control areas within the much larger Morro do Diabo State Park (~36,000 ha). A total of 1,725 birds were captured (81 species, 24 families), from which 223 birds were infested by 2,339 ticks of the genus Amblyomma, mostly by the species A. nodosum. Bird diversity and richness were higher in larger than smaller forest fragments. The prevalence of ticks on birds was inversely correlated with bird diversity and richness. Among 174 A. nodosum tested for rickettsial infection by polymerase chain reaction, 51 were found to be infected by Rickettsia bellii or Rickettsia parkeri. However, tick infection rates by Rickettsia spp. were not statistically different between forest patch sizes. The higher prevalence of ticks on birds in degraded patches might be caused by a dominance of a few generalist bird species in small patches, allowing an easier transmission of parasites among individuals. It could also be related to more favorable microclimatic conditions for the free-living stages of A. nodosum in smaller forest fragments.The higher burden of ticks on birds in smaller forest fragments is an important secondary effect of habitat fragmentation, possibly increasing the likelihood of Rickettsia contagion.</p>
<p><b>An Examination of the Demographic and Environmental Variables Correlated with Lyme Disease Emergence in Virginia.</b><i> Seukep, S.E., Kolivras, K.N., Hong, Y. et al. EcoHealth (2015) 12:4. </i>Lyme disease is the United States’ most significant vector-borne illness. Virginia, on the southern edge of the disease’s currently expanding range, has experienced an increase in Lyme disease both spatially and temporally, with steadily increasing rates over the past decade and disease spread from the northern to the southwestern part of the state. This study used a Geographic Information System and a spatial Poisson regression model to examine correlations between demographic and land cover variables, and human Lyme disease from 2006 to 2010 in Virginia. Analysis indicated that herbaceous land cover is positively correlated with Lyme disease incidence rates. Areas with greater interspersion between herbaceous and forested land were also positively correlated with incidence rates. In addition, income and age were positively correlated with incidence rates. Levels of development, interspersion of herbaceous and developed land, and population density were negatively correlated with incidence rates. Abundance of forest fragments less than 2 hectares in area was not significantly correlated. Our results support some findings of previous studies on ecological variables and Lyme disease in endemic areas, but other results have not been found in previous studies, highlighting the potential contribution of new variables as Lyme disease continues to emerge southward.</p>

<h3> Week 9 </h3>
<p><b>Climate Influence on Emerging Risk Areas for Rift Valley Fever Epidemics in Tanzania.</b><i> Mweya CN, Mboera LE, Kimera SI (2017). Am J Trop Med Hyg 97(1): 109-114. </i>Rift Valley Fever (RVF) is a climate-related arboviral infection of animals and humans. Climate is thought to represent a threat toward emerging risk areas for RVF epidemics globally. The objective of this study was to evaluate influence of climate on distribution of suitable breeding habitats for Culex pipiens complex, potential mosquito vector responsible for transmission and distribution of disease epidemics risk areas in Tanzania. We used ecological niche models to estimate potential distribution of disease risk areas based on vectors and disease co-occurrence data approach. Climatic variables for the current and future scenarios were used as model inputs. Changes in mosquito vectors’ habitat suitability in relation to disease risk areas were estimated. We used partial receiver operating characteristic and the area under the curves approach to evaluate model predictive performance and significance. Habitat suitability for Cx. pipiens complex indicated broad-scale potential for change and shift in the distribution of the vectors and disease for both 2020 and 2050 climatic scenarios. Risk areas indicated more intensification in the areas surrounding Lake Victoria and northeastern part of the country through 2050 climate scenario. Models show higher probability of emerging risk areas spreading toward the western parts of Tanzania from northeastern areas and decrease in the southern part of the country. Results presented here identified sites for consideration to guide surveillance and control interventions to reduce risk of RVF disease epidemics in Tanzania. A collaborative approach is recommended to develop and adapt climate-related disease control and prevention strategies.</p>

<p> <b> Association of anthropogenic land use change and increased abundance of the Chagas disease vector Rhodnius pallescens in a rural landscape of Panama.</b> <i> Gottdenker NL, Calzada JE, Saldaña A, Carroll CR (2011) Am J Trop Med Hyg 84: 70–77. pmid:21212205.</i> Anthropogenic disturbance is associated with increased vector-borne infectious disease transmission in wildlife, domestic animals, and humans. The objective of this study was to evaluate how disturbance of a tropical forest landscape impacts abundance of the triatomine bug Rhodnius pallescens, a vector of Chagas disease, in the region of the Panama Canal in Panama. Rhodnius pallescens was collected (n = 1,186) from its primary habitat, the palm Attalea butyracea, in five habitat types reflecting a gradient of anthropogenic disturbance. There was a high proportion of palms infested with R. pallescensacross all habitat types (range = 77.1–91.4%). Results show that disturbed habitats are associated with increased vector abundance compared with relatively undisturbed habitats. Bugs collected in disturbed sites, although in higher abundance, tended to be in poor body condition compared with bugs captured in protected forest sites. Abundance data suggests that forest remnants may be sources for R. pallescens populations within highly disturbed areas of the landscape.</p>

<p> <b>Climate predictors of the spatial distribution of human plague cases in the West Nile region of Uganda. </b> <i>MacMillan K, Monaghan AJ, Apangu T, Griffith KS, Mead PS, et al. (2012) Am J Trop Med Hyg 86(3): 514–523.K. </i> Climate predictors of the spatial distribution of human plague cases in the West Nile region of Uganda.Am J Trop Med Hyg863514523. East Africa has been identified as a region where vector-borne and zoonotic diseases are most likely to emerge or re-emerge and where morbidity and mortality from these diseases is significant. Understanding when and where humans are most likely to be exposed to vector-borne and zoonotic disease agents in this region can aid in targeting limited prevention and control resources. Often, spatial and temporal distributions of vectors and vector-borne disease agents are predictable based on climatic variables. However, because of coarse meteorological observation networks, appropriately scaled and accurate climate data are often lacking for Africa. Here, we use a recently developed 10-year gridded meteorological dataset from the Advanced Weather Research and Forecasting Model to identify climatic variables predictive of the spatial distribution of human plague cases in the West Nile region of Uganda. Our logistic regression model revealed that within high elevation sites (above 1,300 m), plague risk was positively associated with rainfall during the months of February, October, and November and negatively associated with rainfall during the month of June. These findings suggest that areas that receive increased but not continuous rainfall provide ecologically conducive conditions for Yersinia pestis transmission in this region. This study serves as a foundation for similar modeling efforts of other vector-borne and zoonotic disease in regions with sparse observational meteorologic networks.</p>

<h3> Week 10 </h3>
<p><b>The diversity of the Chagas parasite, Trypanosoma cruzi, infecting the main Central American vector, Triatoma dimidiata, from Mexico to Colombia.</b><i> Dorn PL, McClure AG, Gallaspy MD, Waleckx E, Woods AS, Monroy MC, et al. (2017) PLoS Negl Trop Dis11(9): e0005878.</i> Little is known about the strains of Trypanosoma cruzi circulating in Central America and specifically in the most important vector in this region, Triatoma dimidiata. Approximately six million people are infected with T. cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease, which has the greatest negative economic impact and is responsible for ~12,000 deaths annually in Latin America. By international consensus, strains of T. cruzi are divided into six monophyletic clades called discrete typing units (DTUs TcI-VI) and a seventh DTU first identified in bats called TcBat. TcI shows the greatest geographic range and diversity. Identifying strains present and diversity within these strains is important as different strains and their genotypes may cause different pathologies and may circulate in different localities and transmission cycles, thus impacting control efforts, treatment and vaccine development. To determine parasite strains present in T. dimidiata across its geographic range from Mexico to Colombia, we isolated abdominal DNA from T. dimidiata and determined which specimens were infected with T. cruzi by PCR. Strains from infected insects were determined by comparing the sequence of the 18S rDNA and the spliced-leader intergenic region to typed strains in GenBank. Two DTUs were found: 94% of infected T. dimidiata contained TcI and 6% contained TcIV. TcI exhibited high genetic diversity. Geographic structure of TcI haplotypes was evident by Principal Component and Median-Joining Network analyses as well as a significant result in the Mantel test, indicating isolation by distance. There was little evidence of association with TcI haplotypes and host/vector or ecotope. This study provides new information about the strains circulating in the most important Chagas vector in Central America and reveals considerable variability within TcI as well as geographic structuring at this large geographic scale. The lack of association with particular vectors/hosts or ecotopes suggests the parasites are moving among vectors/hosts and ecotopes therefore a comprehensive approach, such as the Ecohealth approach that makes houses refractory to the vectors will be needed to successfully halt transmission of Chagas disease.</p>

<p><b>Impact of environmental factors on neglected emerging arboviral diseases.</b><i> Lorenz C, Azevedo TS, Virginio F, Aguiar BS, Chiaravalloti-Neto F, Suesdek L (2017) PLoS Negl Trop Dis11(9): e0005959.</i> The Oropouche, Mayaro, Saint Louis, and Rocio viruses are neglected emerging mosquito-borne viruses that are spreading and causing wide-scale epidemics in South America. However, under-reporting of these cases is possible, as the symptoms are shared with other endemic diseases. Moreover, little is known regarding environmental conditions that favor these tropical outbreaks of arboviral diseases. This study examined the association of environmental factors with the probability of occurrence of Oropouche, Mayaro, Saint Louis and Rocio fever outbreaks (present and future) and finds that temperature is a central variable that determines the distribution of high-risk areas. This fact is very worrying, because the average temperature of some areas has increased significantly over the time. Results from this study strongly suggest that these four diseases have the potential to become important public health problems or become increasingly relevant in Brazil and other tropical areas in the coming years and should be monitored as part of effective control programs.</p>

<p><b>Genetic Diversity and Phylogeny of Aedes aegypti, the Main Arbovirus Vector in the Pacific.</b><i> Calvez E, Guillaumot L, Millet L, Marie J, Bossin H, Rama V, et al. (2016) PLoS Negl Trop Dis10(1): e0004374.</i> Aedes aegypti is the major arbovirus vector in the Pacific region. The spread of this mosquito in the different islands seems to be linked to human activities at the beginning of the twentieth century. Since 2010, occurrence of arbovirus outbreaks increased in this region, with the co-circulation of dengue, chikungunya and Zika viruses. The lack of vaccines and treatments for these pathogens led the health authorities to implement vector control measures. In this study, we present the genetic structure and the phylogenetic data obtained from the analysis of 270 Ae. aegypti collected in the Pacific region. The infestation of the islands seems to have American and Asian origins. The genetic structure of the vector populations indicates a differentiation of the mosquitoes between the western, central and eastern Pacific island countries and the specific island isolation context. This differentiation could be related to the different environmental conditions in each island country.</p>

<h3> Week 11 </h3>
<p><b>Anthropogenic Land Use Change and Infectious Diseases: A Review of the Evidence.</b><i> Gottdenker, N.L., Streicker, D.G., Faust, C.L. et al. EcoHealth (2014) 11: 4. </i>Humans have altered ecosystems worldwide, and it is important to understand how this land use change impacts infectious disease transmission in humans and animals. We conducted a systematic review 305 scientific articles investigating how specific types of anthropogenic land use change influence infectious disease dynamics. We summarized findings, highlighted common themes, and drew attention to neglected areas of research. There was an increase in publications on this topic over the last 30 years spanning diseases of humans, livestock, and wildlife, including a large number of zoonotic pathogens. Most papers (66.9%) were observational, 30.8% were review or concept papers, and few studies (2.3%) were experimental in nature, with most studies focusing on vector-borne and/or multi-host pathogens. Common land use change types related to disease transmission were deforestation/forest fragmentation/habitat fragmentation, agricultural development/irrigation, and urbanization/suburbanization. In response to anthropogenic change, more than half of the studies (56.9%) documented increased pathogen transmission, 10.4% of studies observed decreased pathogen transmission, 30.4% had variable and complex pathogen responses, and 2.4% showed no detectable changes. Commonly reported mechanisms by which land use change altered infectious disease transmission included alteration of the vector, host, and pathogen niche, changes in host and vector community composition, changes in behavior or movement of vectors and/or hosts, altered spatial distribution of hosts and/or vectors, and socioeconomic factors, and environmental contamination. We discussed observed patterns in the literature and make suggestions for future research directions, emphasizing the importance of ecological and evolutionary theory to understand pathogen responses in changing landscapes.</p>

<p><b>Mosquito-borne Diseases as a Consequence of Land Use Change. </b><i>Norris, D.E. EcoHealth (2004) 1: 19. </i>Human modification of the natural environment continues to create habitats in which mosquitoes, vectors of a wide variety of human and animal pathogens, thrive if unabated with an enormous potential to negatively affect public health. Historic examples of these modifications include of impoundments, dams, and irrigation systems that create havens for the mosquitoes that transmit malaria, dengue, and filariasis. Additionally, contemporary deforestation appears to be associated with the expansion of mosquito distributions and the increase in mosquito-borne disease transmission. These observations are not unique to the developing world, as urban sprawl also contributes significantly to mosquito habitats and offers a sanctuary to some vector populations. With foresight and planning, most of these systems can be appropriately managed to control vector populations and pathogen transmission. The key to disease control is developing an understanding of the contribution of human landscape modification to vector-borne pathogen transmission and how a balance may be achieved between human development, public health, and responsible land use.</p>

<p><b>Beyond Disciplinary Boundaries: Leptospirosis as a Model of Incorporating Transdisciplinary Approaches to Understand Infectious Disease Emergence. </b><i>Vinetz, J.M., Wilcox, B.A., Aguirre, A. et al. EcoHealth (2005) 2: 291.</i>Leptospirosis is a zoonotic infectious disease of global significance. Political, economic, demographic, ecologic, and other anthropogenically driven environmental changes have fueled the reemergence of this disease in industrialized and developing countries, and in both urban and rural settings. We argue that conventional disciplinary, even interdisciplinary, research methods are not sufficient to elucidate the complex mechanisms and causal relationships among the myriad factors responsible for infectious disease emergence. To address the significant gaps in the field of leptospirosis, an integrated research agenda is needed to guide successful public health remediation of the disease. Based on both working group analysis of literature and newly obtained information, we describe cross-disciplinary collaborative approaches that allow a novel approach to understand leptospirosis emergence with regard to mountain-to-sea ecosystems in Hawai‘i and other region-specific ecosystems. Leptospirosis research is a model for how complementary disciplines in the social, cultural, ecological, and biomedical sciences can optimally interact towards a higher understanding of emerging infectious diseases.</p>

<h3> Week 12 </h3>

<p><b>Falciparum Malaria and Climate Change in the Northwest Frontier Province of Pakistan. </b><i>Bouma MJ, Dye C, Van Der Kaay HJ. Am J Trop Med Hyg 55 131-137.</i> Following a striking increase in the severity of autumnal outbreaks of Plasmodium falciparum during the last decade in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) of Pakistan, the role of climatologic variables was investigated. A multivariate analysis showed that during the transmission season of P. falciparum, the amount of rainfall in September and October, the temperature in November and December, and the humidity in December were all correlated (r2 = 0.82) with two measures of P. falciparum, the falciparum rate (percent of slides examined positive for P. falciparum) since 1981 and the annual P. falciparum proportion (percent of all malaria infections diagnosed as P. falciparum) since 1978. Climatologic records since 1876 show an increase in mean November and December temperatures by 2°C and 1.5°C, respectively, and in October rainfall. Mean humidity in December has also been increasing since 1950. These climatologic changes in the area appear to have made conditions for transmission of P. falciparum more favorable, and may account for the increase in incidence observed in the NWFP in recent years.</p>


<p><b>Seasonal Distribution and Climatic Correlates of Dengue Disease in Dhaka, Bangladesh. </b><i>Morales I, Salje H, Saha S, Gurley ES. Am J Trop Med Hyg 94: 1359-1361</i> Dengue has been regularly reported in Dhaka, Bangladesh, since a large outbreak in 2000. However, to date, we have limited information on the seasonal distribution of dengue disease and how case distribution correlates with climate. Here, we analyzed dengue cases detected at a private diagnostic facility in Dhaka during 2010–2014. We calculated Pearson cross-correlation coefficients to examine the relationship between the timing of cases and both rainfall and temperature. There were 2,334 cases diagnosed during the study period with 76% over the age of 15 years. Cases were reported in every month of the study; however, 90% of cases occurred between June and November. Increases in rainfall were correlated with increases in cases 2 months later (correlation of 0.7). The large proportion of adult cases is consistent with substantial population susceptibility and suggests Dhaka remains at risk for outbreaks. Although cases occurred year-round, public health preparedness should be focused during peak months.</p>


<p><b>Emergence of a new neotropical malaria vector facilitated by human migration and changes in land use.</b><i>Conn JE, Wilkerson RC, Segura MNO, de Souza RTL, Chlichting CD, Wirtz RA, Póvoa MM 2002. Am J Trop Med Hyg 66: 18-22. </i>In a region of northeastern Amazonia, we find a species previously of minor importance, Anopheles marajoara, to be the principal malaria vector. In a total of five collections during 1996-97 in three replicated sites near the city of Macapá, Amapá state, this species occurs in much greater abundance compared with the presumed vector Anopheles darlingi. Also, a significantly higher proportion of An. marajoara is infected with malaria parasites, determined by the ELISA technique. This appears to be the result of increased abundance of An. marajoara due to alterations in land use, invasion of its primary breeding sites by human immigrants, and its anthropophilic behavior. This discovery highlights one of the challenges of Neotropical malaria control, namely that the targeting of specific vectors may be complicated by a changing mosaic of different locally important vectors and their interactions with human populations.</p>

<h3> Week 13 </h3>

<p><b>Landscape Ecology of Sylvatic Chikungunya Virus and Mosquito Vectors in Southeastern Senegal. </b><i>Diallo D, Sall AA, Buenemann M, Chen R, Faye O, Diagne CT, et al. (2012) PLoS Negl Trop Dis6(6): e1649. </i>Chikungunya is a mosquito-borne virus that infects and sickens people in many tropical, urban regions of the world. This virus circulates in forest cycles of West Africa, where mosquitoes transmit it among non-human primates. It also infects humans via bridge vectors, mosquitoes that feed on both non-human primates and humans. To date, little is known about the environmental factors that influence the abundance and distribution of mosquito vectors that participate in the forest cycle of this virus or about specific mosquitoes that are likely to act as bridge vectors. We studied the distribution and abundance of mosquitoes potentially involved in the forest cycle in southeastern Senegal, as well as their infection by this virus. Satellite imagery was used to classify the region into the 5 most abundant land cover elements, and mosquitoes attracted to humans were collected in sites representing each land cover class. We found that Aedes furcifer, a mosquito that occurs in all land cover types and also enters villages to feed on humans, is probably the most important bridge vector between forest circulation and human populations.</p>


<p><b>Ongoing Spillover of Hantaan and Gou Hantaviruses from Rodents Is Associated with Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome (HFRS) in China. </b><i>Wang W, Wang M-R, Lin X-D, Guo W-P, Li M-H, Mei S-H, et al. (2013) PLoS Negl Trop Dis7(10): e2484. </i>Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) is a major public health problem in China despite human vaccination. We investigated the epidemiology and emergence of HFRS in Longquan (Zhejiang Province), a rural area with a high incidence of HFRS. During 1974–2011, a total of 1866 cases of HFRS were recorded in Longquan, including 20 deaths. Strikingly, phylogenetic analyses of viral sequences sampled from local rodents in Longquan revealed the presence of novel variants of Gou virus (GOUV) in Rattus sp. rats and Hantaan virus (HTNV) in the stripe field mice, respectively. Moreover, viral sequences sampled from infected humans in Longquan were very closely related to those from rodents. Overall, these data indicate that there is a continual spillover GOUV and HTNV from rodents to humans in Longquan, and this might be responsible for the high prevalence of HFRS. As well as highlighting the importance of the human-animal interface, these data also suggest that GOUV is now the major cause of HFRS in this region.</p>

<p><b>Animals in the Zika Virus Life Cycle: What to Expect from Megadiverse Latin American Countries.</b><i>  Bueno MG, Martinez N, Abdalla L, Duarte dos Santos CN, Chame M (2016) PLoS Negl Trop Dis10(12): e0005073.</i> Zika virus (ZIKV) was first isolated in 1947 in primates in Uganda, West Africa. The virus remained confined to the equatorial regions of Africa and Asia, cycling between infecting monkeys, arboreal mosquitoes, and occasionally humans. The ZIKV Asiatic strain was probably introduced into Brazil in or around late 2013. Presently, ZIKV is in contact with the rich biodiversity in all Brazilian biomes, bordering on other Latin American countries. Infections in Brazilian primates have been reported recently, but the overall impact of this virus on wildlife in the Americas is still unknown. The current epidemic in the Americas requires knowledge on the role of mammals, especially nonhuman primates (NHPs), in ZIKV transmission to humans. The article discusses the available data on ZIKV in host animals and issues of biodiversity, rapid environmental change, and impact on human health in megadiverse Latin American countries. The authors reviewed scientific articles and recent news stories on ZIKV in animals, showing that 47 animal species from three orders (mammals, reptiles, and birds) have been investigated for the potential to establish a sylvatic cycle. The review aims to contribute to epidemiological studies and the knowledge on the natural history of ZIKV. The article concludes with questions that require urgent attention in epidemiological studies involving wildlife in order to understand their role as ZIKV hosts and to effectively control the epidemic.</p>


<h3> Week 14 </h3>
<p><b>Landscape Utilisation, Animal Behaviour and Hendra Virus Risk.</b><i> Field HE, Smith CS, de Jong CE, Melville D, Broos A, Kung N, Thompson J, Dechmann DKN. EcoHealth (2016) 13:1. </i>Hendra virus causes sporadic fatal disease in horses and humans in eastern Australia. Pteropid bats (flying-foxes) are the natural host of the virus. The mode of flying-fox to horse transmission remains unclear, but oro-nasal contact with flying-fox urine, faeces or saliva is the most plausible. We used GPS data logger technology to explore the landscape utilisation of black flying-foxes and horses to gain new insight into equine exposure risk. Flying-fox foraging was repetitious, with individuals returning night after night to the same location. There was a preference for fragmented arboreal landscape and non-native plant species, resulting in increased flying-fox activity around rural infrastructure. Our preliminary equine data logger study identified significant variation between diurnal and nocturnal grazing behaviour that, combined with the observed flying-fox foraging behaviour, could contribute to Hendra virus exposure risk. While we found no significant risk-exposing difference in individual horse movement behaviour in this study, the prospect warrants further investigation, as does the broader role of animal behaviour and landscape utilisation on the transmission dynamics of Hendra virus.</p>

<p><b>Henipaviruses: Gaps in the Knowledge of Emergence. </b><i>Hyatt AD, Daszak P, Cunningham, Field H, Gould AR. EcoHealth (2004) 1:1. </i>Over the past 10 years many “new” viruses have been identified in Australia and the Asian region. The viruses have been isolated from, and/or identified in, a range of animals; some of these viruses are of veterinary and medical importance while others are new threats to biodiversity. Of these viruses, Hendra and Nipah viruses have emerged as significant zoonotic agents belonging to the family Paramyxoviridae and genus Henipavirus. These agents cause fatalities in a range of animals including horses, pigs, and humans. Both viruses have been isolated from flying foxes (genus Pteropus; suborder Megachiroptera), which are accepted as their natural hosts. Although some research has been undertaken on the viruses and their hosts, little is known about how these viruses emerge. We have attempted to investigate the current knowledge of the bat-Henipavirus ecology by discussing the range of bat viruses that exist (viral assemblage), the significance of evolving viruses, possible functional role(s) of viruses, the ecology of viruses and their hosts, and identifying possible drivers (selection pressures) that may culminate with the overlap of new potential viral hosts thereby facilitating the replication of fit viral populations in a new host–virus continuum(s). By undertaking such an analysis, we have attempted to identify key questions, which should be investigated if the factors involved in “driving” Henipavirus emergence are to be understood.</p>

<p><b>Testing Mechanisms of the Dilution Effect: Deer Mice Encounter Rates, Sin Nombre Virus Prevalence and Species Diversity. </b><i>Clay CA, Lehmer EM, St. Jeor S, Dearing D. EcoHealth (2009) 6:2. </i>Species diversity has been shown to decrease prevalence of disease in a variety of host–pathogen systems, in a phenomenon termed the Dilution Effect. Several mechanisms have been proposed by which diversity may decrease prevalence, though few have been tested in natural host-pathogen systems. We investigated the mechanisms by which diversity influenced the prevalence of Sin Nombre virus (SNV), a directly transmitted virus in deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus). We monitored both intra and interspecific encounters of deer mice using foraging arenas at five sites in the Great Basin Desert with disparate levels of species diversity to examine two potential mechanisms which may contribute to the dilution of SNV prevalence: (1) reduced frequency of encounters between deer mice, or (2) reduced duration of contacts between deer mice. We also investigated the relationship between deer mouse density and these mechanisms, as density is often predicted to influence both inter and intraspecific encounters. Results of our study indicate that frequency of intraspecific interactions between deer mice was reduced with increased diversity. Species diversity did not impact average duration of encounters. Density was correlated with absolute, but not relative rates of encounters between deer mice, suggesting that encounters may be influenced by factors other than density. Our study indicates that species diversity influences the dynamics of SNV by reducing encounters between deer mice in a trade-off between intra and interspecific interactions.</p>














</nav>
		<div class="container">
    		<div class="blurb">
        		<h1> Summaries </h1>
			<h3> Week 3 </h3>
		<p> <b>Sharp, P. M., and B. H. Hahn. 2011. Origins of HIV and the AIDS pandemic. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 1:a006841</b> Researchers looked at the origin of HIV and SIV viruses, the factors that enabled cross-species transmission of the viruses, and the host related barriers to cross-species transmission. HIV-1 group M, the strain causing the global aids pandemic, originated from a chimpanzee SIV virus in southeast Cameroon. While there is evidence that SIV viruses have been present in primates for over 30,000 years, HIV originated in the early 1900s. HIV-1 emerged at a time when urban populations were expanding. There are several barriers to cross-species transmission, including the host restriction factor tetherin. SIV viruses attack tetherin’s cytoplasmic domain. Because that method is ineffective in humans, HIV-1 evolved to attack tetherin’s membrane-spanning domain. HIV-1 M’s ability to fully attack tetherin in this way may be why it is the only group to achieve pandemic status.</p>
			<p><b>Plowright, R. K., P. Eby, P. J. Hudson, I. L. Smith, D. Westcott, W. L. Bryden, D. Middleton, P. A. Reid, R. A. McFarlane, G. Martin, G. M. Tabor, L. F. Skerratt, D. L. Anderson, G. Crameri, D. Quammen, D. Jordan, P. Freeman, L.-F. Wang, J. H. Epstein, G. A. Marsh, N. Y. Kung, and H. McCallum. 2015. Ecological dynamics of emerging bat virus spillover. Proc. Biol. Sci. 282:20142124.</b> Bats play important roles as reservoir hosts in many emerging zoonotic viruses. Researchers focused on the ecological causes of spill over events between bats and humans/domestic animals. In order for spill over to occur, bats must be infected, they must be shedding virus in large enough numbers, the virus must be able to survive outside the bats, domestic animals must have contact with bat excretions, and the animals must be susceptible to the virus. Research has shown that bats shed virus particles in “pulses” where viral shedding in an area is greatly increased during a certain period of time. The researchers present two hypotheses for this. The episodic shedding hypothesis states that when bats are stressed, their immune system is weakened and they shed a greater number of virus particles. The transient epidemics hypothesis states that as immunity to a certain virus decreases over generations, a new pool of susceptible bats can become infected and shed the virus. Restoring bat habitat and food sources along with restricting domestic animals from grazing in areas near bats may decrease the chance of spillover.</p>
			<h3> Week 4 </h3>
	<p><b>Civitello, D. J., J. Cohen, H. Fatima, N. T. Halstead, J. Liriano, T. A. McMahon, C. N. Ortega, E. L. Sauer, T. Sehgal, S. Young, and J. R. Rohr. 2015. Biodiversity inhibits parasites: Broad evidence for the dilution effect. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112:8667–8671.</b> In the past few decades, biodiversity has been decreasing and the number of infectious disease outbreaks has been increasing. The dilution effect hypothesis posits that these two occurrences may be linked considering biodiversity in host communities inhibits the spread of parasites. By conducting a meta-analysis, researchers found strong evidence that the dilution effect influences both parasites and herbivores (associational resistance). Because the dilution effect influences herbivores as well as parasites, it may also influence other host/prey relationships. Researchers found that dilution effects were dependent on the host frequency rather than density, and that the dilution effect did not depend on any specific ecological factors, such as the lifecycle of the parasite or the host type (wildlife vs. humans). Researchers conclude that preserving biodiversity may be a potential strategy in limiting the number and severity of infectious disease outbreaks.</p>
			<p><b>Johnson PTJ, Preston DL, Hoverman JT, Richgels KLD. Biodiversity decreases disease through predictable changes in host community competence. Nature 2013; 494(7436): 230-3.</b> There is increasing evidence that biodiversity may decrease the prevalence of infectious disease. However, this dilution effect hypothesis remains controversial as there is little evidence directly linking species diversity and disease risk. The theory behind the dilution effect states that as species diversity increases through the addition of species with low host competency, disease risk decreases. However, researchers have pointed out that if species richness increases by adding species with high host competency, there may be an increase in disease risk rather than a decline. Using experiments and field data, researchers provide empirical evidence that species diversity limits the spread of a virus in amphibian communities. Communities with high diversity had a smaller proportion of species with high host competency and a reduced infection rate. Researchers also found evidence that amphibian species diversity, the amount of infected snails, and the amount of infected amphibians were linked. Because of this, the researchers concluded that future studies should access ecological factors such as vectors and intermediate hosts when evaluating the dilution effect in a community.</P>
<h3> Week 5 </h3>
	<p><b>Vittor, A. Y., W. Pan, R. H. Gilman, J. Tielsch, G. Glass, T. Shields, W. Sánchez-Lozano, V. V. Pinedo, E. Salas-Cobos, S. Flores, and J. A. Patz. 2009. Linking deforestation to malaria in the Amazon: characterization of the breeding habitat of the principal malaria vector, Anopheles darlingi. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 81:5–12.</b> Previous research has linked deforestation to increasing outbreaks of malaria. Researchers collected larvae from locations with varying degrees of deforestation in the Amazon and identified the mosquito species when the larvae matured. Researchers analyzed the relationship between the presence of Anopheles darlingi, the species known to be the most significant malaria vector, and a variety of ecological factors. The presence of A. darling larvae was found to increase with the presence of secondary growth, algae, and large ponds (such as fish farms). These findings support the hypothesis that a cycle of deforestation, land abandonment and secondary growth increases the prevalence of A. darling and the risk of malaria. The authors suggest that educating local populations and promoting sustainable agriculture might reduce the risk of malaria.</p>
	<p><b> Pienkowski, T., B. L. Dickens, H. Sun, and L. R. Carrasco. 2017. Empirical evidence of the public health benefits of tropical forest conservation in Cambodia: a generalised linear mixed-effects model analysis. The Lancet Planetary Health 1:e180–e187.</b> Researchers evaluated if deforestation was correlated with public health by investigating the prevalence of diarrhea, respiratory infection, and fever in children. Researchers found that protected land areas were associated with lower rates of these illnesses in children. There are several reasons deforestation may contribute to lowered standards of health. For example, deforestation has been associated with disrupted water cycles that introduce a greater number of microbes into drinking water. Deforestation can also create favorable conditions for mosquitos that serve as vectors, and the smoke created during the deforestation process can lead to respiratory issues. Researchers concluded that while protected land areas exhibit greater public health, this is not necessarily due to the prevention of deforestation. Protected areas may have other factors that independently influence public health such as less exposure to zoonotic diseases and stabile land access that improves socioeconomic conditions.</p>
	<h3> Week 6 </h3>
	<p><b>Rico-Hesse, R., L. M. Harrison, R. A. Salas, D. Tovar, A. Nisalak, C. Ramos, J. Boshell, M. T. de Mesa, R. M. Nogueira, and A. T. da Rosa. 1997.</b> Origins of dengue type 2 viruses associated with increased pathogenicity in the Americas. Virology 230:244–251. The dengue virus can cause dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic fever. Dengue fever produces flu like symptoms while dengue hemorrhagic fever causes hemorrhagic disease and can result in death. Dengue hemorrhagic fever has recently been spreading in South America. Previous research has shown that the more severe form of dengue is caused by type two Dengue viruses. Researchers examined phylogenetic data of virus strains isolated from South America and compared them to virus strains from Southeast Asia. They found that Dengue virus type 2 was likely first introduced to the Americas from Southeast Asia in the 1980 Cuban epidemic. After 1989, samples from Brazil, Columbia, Mexico and Venezuela show evidence of dengue type 2 viruses related to Southeast Asian strains. Since its introduction into the Americas, the Southeast Asian strains has displaced native South American strains as the dominant genotype. Researchers concluded that two genotypes of type two dengue viruses originated in Southeast Asia and are responsible for the surge of Dengue Hemorrhagic fever in the Americas. They suggest that using weakened type two viruses from Southeast Asia will likely produce an effective vaccine.</p>

<p><b>Liu, Y., J. Liu, S. Du, C. Shan, K. Nie, R. Zhang, X.-F. Li, R. Zhang, T. Wang, C.-F. Qin, P. Wang, P.-Y. Shi, and G. Cheng. 2017. Evolutionary enhancement of Zika virus infectivity in Aedes aegyptimosquitoes. Nature 545:482–486.</b> Phylogenetic analysis of the Zika virus has shown that there are African and Asian lineages. The Asian linage is responsible for the recent major outbreaks in the Americas. Researchers compared Asian Zika strains from Cambodia in 2010 (pre-epidemic) to three post-epidemic South American strains and determined that the post-epidemic strains had higher NS1 secretion rates. This higher secretion rate is due to an alanine to valine substitution in the NS1 protein. Researchers determined NS1 likely gained secretability when Zika migrated from Asia to the southern pacific islands. Experiments showed this mutation causes higher NS1 antigenaemia and increases the transmission rate from mice to mosquitos. Since African lineages also have the alanine to valine substitution, researchers hypothesized that other factors may be preventing human outbreaks from those strains. Researchers concluded that the NS1 mutation has allowed human to mosquito transmission to occur more efficiently and has contributed to the recent outbreaks of Zika virus in the Americas. </p>

<h3> Week 7 </h3>

<p><b>Bryant, J. E., E. C. Holmes, and A. D. T. Barrett. 2007. Out of Africa: a molecular perspective on the introduction of yellow fever virus into the Americas. PLoS Pathog.3:e75</b> Yellow fever virus has been reemerging in Africa in the past few decades. Using isolates from 22 countries taken throughout the 1900s and 2000s, Researchers analyzed the virus’s prM and E genes to determine how the virus spread. They determined that the virus likely originated in East Africa before spreading to West Africa. Slave ships then transported the virus and the vector, <i>Aedes aegypti</i> mosquitos, to the Americas. The two South American lineages were established after introduction and have remained isolated. The researchers used estimated mutation rates to determine that the introduction of the virus into the Americas is consistent with the salve trade timeline. While yellow fever has largely been knocked down by vaccination, there have been several recent cases of imported yellow fever into non-endemic areas. These cases suggest yellow fever may present a problem in the future if it is introduced into a region with favorable conditions. </p>

<p><b>Kilpatrick, A. M., A. A. Chmura, D. W. Gibbons, R. C. Fleischer, P. P. Marra, and P. Daszak. 2006.Predicting the global spread of H5N1 avian influenza. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103:19368–19373.</b> The H5N1 virus is an avian influenza that has caused significant economic loss in the past. Researchers determined the most likely rout of entry for H5N1 into several different countries by examining the risk of introduction due to poultry importation, the wild bird trade, and migratory birds. Researchers discovered that H5N1 spread throughout Asia and Africa mostly through the poultry trade while it spread predominately through migratory birds in Europe. The Americas are most vulnerable to H5N1 through poultry and wild bird trade. The US is at lower risk from poultry trade as all imported birds are tested for H5N1. However, if H5N1 spreads to Siberia, migration will present a substantial risk for the US. Researchers conclude a ban on imported poultry and surveillance of sick and dead migratory birds will reduce the risk of H5N1 spread in the Americas. </p>

<h3> Week 8 </h3>

<p> <b> Althouse, B. M., N. Vasilakis, A. A. Sall, M. Diallo, S. C. Weaver, and K. A. Hanley. 2016. Potential for Zika Virus to Establish a Sylvatic Transmission Cycle in the Americas. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10:e0005055.</b> Researchers examine the possibility of the Zika arbovirus establishing a sylvatic transmission cycle in the Americas. Some arboviruses such as yellow fever have established sylvatic transmission cycles after introduction to the Americas while others such as Dengue have not. A sylvatic cycle in Asian Zika has not been established, but this may be due to lack of surveillance. If Zika establishes a sylvatic cycle in the Americas, it will be much more difficult to eradicate. Researchers found the risk of sylvatic establishment increases with a shorter primate lifespan and decreases with a larger primate to mosquito ratio. Using a conservative estimate, researchers conclude the risk of sylvatic establishment is substantial. However, the host competence of New world primate and mosquito species must be investigated to achieve a more accurate risk assessment.</p>


<p> <b> Hanley, K. A., T. P. Monath, S. C. Weaver, S. L. Rossi, R. L. Richman, and N. Vasilakis. 2013. Fever versus fever: the role of host and vector susceptibility and interspecific competition in shaping the current and future distributions of the sylvatic cycles of dengue virus and yellow fever virus. Infect. Genet. Evol. 19:292–311.</b>Dengue and Yellow Fever are both flaviviruses and share many similarities including similar primate hosts and vector species. However, dengue fever but not yellow fever is present in Asia. Yellow fever but not sylvatic Dengue is present in the Americas. Dengue has also established stable human transmission cycles while human transmission cycles in yellow fever virus tend to die out. Researchers concluded that the geographical differences between the viruses may be due to Dengue going unnoticed in certain regions and no major trades routes to spread the virus into certain areas. Vectors and primate hosts are likely not impeding the spread of Dengue and Yellow fever into the Americas and Asia. Direct competition may prevent Yellow Fever from becoming established in regions where a high number of mosquitos are infected with Dengue. Researchers conclude that while Yellow Fever is unlikely to become established in Asia, sylvatic Dengue establishment in the Americas is a real theat. </p>

<h3> Week 9 </h3>

<p><b>Garza, M., T. P. Feria Arroyo, E. A. Casillas, V. Sanchez-Cordero, C.-L. Rivaldi, and S. Sarkar. 2014. Projected future distributions of vectors of Trypanosoma cruzi in North America under climate change scenarios. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 8:e2818.</b> The parasite <i>Trypanosoma cruzi</i> causes Chagas disease and is transmitted by Triatominae insect vectors. Researchers described the current range of the two vectors <i>Triatoma gerstaeckeri</i> and <i>Triatoma sanguisuga</i> and used climate change models to determine future ranges. They found that the range of <i>T. sanguisuga</i> and <i> T. gerstaeckeri </i>would likely expand North as a result of climate change. However,<i> T. gerstaeckeri’s</i> northeast expansion and both vectors northwest expansion route is discontinuous. The expansion to these areas would rely on the vectors traveling over ranges of unsuitable habitat or being transported by humans. Overall, the study indicates an increase in Chagas disease risk in North America as a result of climate change. Researchers caution that this study does not take into consideration factors such as host distributions and factors unrelated to climate change. </p>

<p><b>Daszak, P., C. Zambrana-Torrelio, T. L. Bogich, M. Fernandez, J. H. Epstein, K. A. Murray, and H. Hamilton. 2013. Interdisciplinary approaches to understanding disease emergence: the past, present, and future drivers of Nipah virus emergence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110 Suppl 1:3681–3688.</b> Emerging infectious diseases often emerge as a result of anthropogenic and demographic changes and require multiple disciplines to accurately study all driving factors. Nipah virus likely emerged in Malaysia from two spillover events. The virus was transmitted from fruit bat populations to pigs kept near fruit trees. This spill over resulted from increased agriculture and dual use agriculture. Climate change has the potential to change the range of virus reservoir hosts, therefore changing the range of the virus. Researchers used ecological niche modeling to determine the distribution of Nipah virus as a result of climate change. Researchers used bat geographic ranges to estimate henipavirus ranges and used the A2 emissions model to predict climate change. They predict a range expansion of henipavirus into West Africa, West India, and Northern Australia. Researchers mention that climate change can increase disease risk in ways besides geographic expansion. Warmer temperatures and less food may place stress on bats, increasing viral shedding and the chance of spillover. Researchers advocate for using ecological niche modeling to estimate geographic changes and the risk of emergence in directly transmitted viruses. </p>

<h3> Week 10 </h3>

<p><b>Bayer, A. M., G. C. Hunter, R. H. Gilman, J. G. Cornejo Del Carpio, C. Naquira, C. Bern, and M. Z. Levy. 2009. Chagas disease, migration and community settlement patterns in Arequipa, Peru. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 3:e567.</b> Chagas disease is normally found in rural areas, but has established urban transmission cycles in Arequipa, Peru. Researchers examined how migration affected vector and disease incidence in Arequipa. They found that rural migrants were not likely to bring the disease into pueblos jovenes. However, pueblos jovenes inhabitants often travel to infected valleys for seasonal work, and could have brought the vectors or parasite back with them. High population density and the introduction of domesticated animals may have contributed to the disease risk in pueblos jovenes. While the pueblos tradicionale Tio Chico had a low incidence of vector, the pueblos tradicionale Quequena had a high incidence of vector and disease.  This may be due to the fact that Quequena is experiencing immigration from low-income areas and increasing population density while Tio Chico is not. Researchers recommend surveillance in areas of high population mobility. </p>

<p><b>Wood, C. L., A. McInturff, H. S. Young, D. Kim, and K. D. Lafferty. 2017. Human infectious disease burdens decrease with urbanization but not with biodiversity. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 372. </b> Researchers used disability-adjusted life years to examine the relationship between infectious disease and disease drivers. The study includes 60 countries and measures change over time. Researchers found that change in economic and demographic factors correlated with change in disease burden. They found that urbanization was the only factor spatially and temporally associated with disease burden. Urbanized countries had lower disease burdens, and as urbanization increased over time disease burden lessened. Wealthy countries had less disease, but increasing wealth over time did not reduce overall disease burden. Researchers also found no evidence for the dilution effect hypothesis. Increasing biodiversity had different results for different countries. Biotic factors such as temperature and rainfall did not have a significant association with overall disease burden as results depended on the physiology of particular diseases. </p>

<h3> Week 11 </h3>
<p><b>Miller MJ, Loaiza JR. Geographic expansion of the invasive mosquito Aedes albopictus across Panama—Implications for control of dengue and chikungunya viruses. PLoS neglected tropical diseases. 2015 Jan 8;9(1):e0003383</b><i>. Aedes Albopictus </i> is a mosquito vector for dengue and chikungunya viruses and is expanding its territory across Panama. Researchers determined that the spread of<i> Ae. albopictus </i>occurred mostly through road networks. Climate and human density did not predict dispersal patterns for <i>Ae. Albopictus</i>.  This agrees with previous research that dispersal of <i>Ae. albopictus</i> is aided primarily by human transportation. Models predict future <i>Ae. albopictus</i> expansion into northwestern and eastern Panama. Researchers advocate for fumigation of vehicles at checkpoints to slow further <i>Ae. albopictus</i> expansion.

<h3> Week 12 </h3>
<p><b>Gibbs, E. P. J. 2014. The evolution of One Health: a decade of progress and challenges for the future. Vet. Rec. 174:85–91.</b> The One Health initiative proposes collaboration between Veterinarians, Doctors, and other specialists and agencies to prevent epidemics and improve general health conditions. Since its inception, it has made definite strides. One Health is now taught as part of the curriculum in US veterinarian colleges. The One Health strategy was used in containing the H5N1 epidemic, and a One Health office has been established at the CDC. While health professionals are increasingly becoming familiar with One Health, the general public is not. Policy makers are interested in the concept of One Health, but often have difficulty with implementation. The authors argue that implementation of One Health is hindered by its lack of agenda. Accountability and defined goals are necessary for the One Health initiative to reach its full potential in the future. </p>

<p><b>Fitzpatrick, M. C., H. A. Shah, A. Pandey, A. M. Bilinski, M. Kakkar, A. D. Clark, J. P. Townsend, S. S. Abbas, and A. P. Galvani. 2016.</b> One Health approach to cost-effective rabies control in India. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113:14574–14581. Researchers examined the cost effectiveness of rabies intervention programs in India. Using WHO guidelines for cost effectiveness, they found that the most effective strategy was vaccinating dogs. This strategy is especially effective if owners bring dogs to a central location for vaccination in addition to teams catching stray dogs. If more permissive cost effective guidelines are used, sterilizing female dogs would also significantly bring down the prevalence of rabies. The authors stress that a One Health approach, which encourages cooperation between local doctors, veterinarians and other agencies, has the potential to be more cost effective than previously realized. </p>

<h3> Week 13 </h3>

<p><b>Bauch, S. C., A. M. Birkenbach, S. K. Pattanayak, and E. O. Sills. 2015. Public health impacts of ecosystem change in the Brazilian Amazon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112:7414–7419. </b>Researchers attempt to understand the relationship between ecosystem health and human health by focusing on malaria, acute respiratory infection and diarrhea in the Brazilian amazon. They found that strict protection areas were the only factor negatively correlated with all three diseases. Sustainable protection areas were positively correlated with malaria. Roads had both positive and negative health effects. They were positively associated with malaria, but negatively associated with ARI and diarrhea. The authors conclude that establishing strict conservation areas will have a positive impact on human health. However, public policies regarding roads and mining may have mixed health effects. </p>

<p><b>Valle, D., and J. Clark. 2013. Conservation efforts may increase malaria burden in the Brazilian Amazon. PLoS One 8:e57519. </b>There are two major theories regarding the relationship between forest cover and Malaria incidence. One hypothesis posits that deforestation leads to higher malaria incidence while the other posits that proximity to forest fringes increase Malaria incidence. Researchers found that while proximity to forest cover and deforestation were both positively associated with Malaria, the impact of proximity to forest fringes far outweighed the impact of deforestation. This suggests that limiting deforestation in already settled areas may increase Malaria incidence. The findings of this study conflict with previous research. The authors suggest that this may be due to different land use patterns between the Brazilian amazon and the Peruvian amazon. In the Peruvian Amazon, forest is replaced by shrubbery and secondary vegetation that favors the primary malaria vector <i>A. darlingi</i>. In the Brazilian Amazon, forest is replaced by pasture and soy plantations that do not favor <i>A. darlingi</i>. Researchers advocate for policies that address the trade-off between conservation and public health. </p>

<p><b>Kilpatrick, A. M., D. J. Salkeld, G. Titcomb, and M. B. Hahn. 2017. Conservation of biodiversity as a strategy for improving human health and well-being. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 372. </b>Researchers evaluate future research goals for improving health through conservation. There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that biodiversity and disease risk are correlated. Future research should determine if this link is causal and determine possible the mechanisms behind this linkage. Next, researchers must determine how a conservation strategy will effect the total disease burden rather than focusing on a single disease. Finally, researchers must evaluate the benefits of conservation against the economic disadvantages to local populations. It is possible that targeted strategies such as species introduction or vaccination may be more cost effective than conservation strategies. </p>



	









        		
